---
layout: default
title: calendar
---

# calendar {#history}
{: .no_toc}

1. week
{:toc}

## Introduction (Aug. 25)

To get us thinking critically about the concept of History before turning our
attention to the Spanish Inquisition, we will spend some time reading about
History and Progress from a philosophical perspective, and set some primary
categories of method and politics on the table.

We start the semester with four short pieces. Two address the natural and
possible limits of historical knowledge and temporality. Two move us towards
looking over the Inquisitor's shoulder. While reading, consider this big
question: *What is the status of the past?*. 

* Tosaka Jun, "The Principle of Everydayness and Historical Time," pp. 3-16 in
  Ken C. Kawashima, Fabian Schäfer, and Robert Stolz, eds., *Tosaka Jun:
  A Critical Reader* (Columbia University East Asia Program, 2013).

* Walter Benjamin, "Theses on the Philosophy of History," pp. 196-209 in
  *Illuminations: Essays and Reflections*, ed. Hannah Arendt (Mariner Books,
  2019).

* Carlo Ginzburg, "The Inquisitor as Anthropologist," pp. 156-164 in *Clues,
  Myths, and the Historical Method* (JHU Press, 1989).

* Maya Soifer, "Beyond convivencia: critical reflections on the historiography
  of interfaith relations in Christian Spain,' *Journal of Medieval Iberian
  Studies* 1:1 (2009), pp. 19-35.

## The Broad Strokes (Sep. 1)

This week, each of you will pick one of three recent general overviews of the
Spanish Inquisition, and read them with an eye for the fundamental historical
questions that shape the more specialist historiography. What do these works
elide, and what do they put to the forefront?

Please choose one of the following monographs (and hopefully we'll have all
three represented!?):

* Henry Kamen, *The Spanish Inquisition: A Historical Revision* (Yale, 1998).  
* Joseph Perez, *The Spanish Inquisition* (Yale, 2005).
* Helen Rawlings, *The Spanish Inquisition* (Blackwell, 2006).

## Conversos and the Jewish Heresy (Sep. 8) 

The nominal justification of Reina Isabel de Castilla for sponsoring the
Inquisition was to guard the purity of the Spanish Church, particularly from
the threat posed by "judiazers." This week, we're looking at what
microhistories of four converso prosecutions can tell us about the converso and
Jewish experience under the Inquisition on both sides of the Atlantic.

Read:

* Miriam Bodian, *Dying in the Law of Moses: Crypto-Jewish Martyrdom in the
  Iberian Wold*. Indiana Univ. Press, 2007.

* Stefania Pastore, "False Trials and Jews with Old-Fashioned Names: Converso
  Memory in Toledo," *Loa corónica* 41.1 (Falll 2012): 235-262.


## Locality (Sep. 15) 

The Spanish monarchy, and it's broader empire, was highly decentralized. Even
after the consolidation of Hapsburg rule and its claims to absolute royal
power, conditions were negotiated locally, and manifested in such forms as the
legal customs and charters of the fuero. How did this manifest in the nominally
centralized power of the Holy Office? This week, we look at the operations of
the Inquisition in Guadalupe, Spain. How do historians substantiate motive in
the actions of the Inquisition, and in its identified targets?

Read:

* Gretchen D. Starr-LeBeau, *In the Shadow of the Virgin: Inquisitors, Friars,
  and **Conversos** in Guadalupe, Spain*. Princeton University Press, 2003.

## Moving Up and Out (Sep. 22)

The Atlantic Empire of the Castile is most commonly associated with the Spanish
Empire of the 15th and 16th-century Empire. But, the Crown of Aragon also
managed Spanish imperial power in the Mediterranean. This week looks at the
operations of the Inquisition in Spain's European and Mediterranean
borderlands.

Read:

* William Monter, *Frontiers of Heresy: The Spanish INquisition form the Basque
  Lands to Sicily*. Cambridge Univ. Press, 1990.


## Witchcraft? (Sep. 29) 

The predominate imagination around witchcraft in Europe envisions dramatic
trials and public executions that were often absent in Spain and its empire.
Nonetheless, this week we'll consider a provocative account of the interest in
and persecution of witches and witchcraft as a form of primitive accumulation. 

Read:

* Silvia Federici, *Calaban and the Witch: Women, the Body and Primitive
  Accumulation*. Audonomedia, 2004.


## Gender and Sexuality I (Oct. 6) 

The Spanish Inquisition had differing effects on men and women. Women's control
over and proximity to food, a significant supposed marker of religious
identity, placed them at risk of suspicion. But also, the potential heretical
spirituality of women outside of or weakly underneath priestly control
problematized their religious commitments beyond questions of limpieza de
sangre. This week's readings include a short book on the political implications
of ecstatic dreams, as well as a series of essays on women in Iberia under the
Inquisition.

Read:

* Mary Giles, ed. *Women in the Inquisition: Spain and the New World*. JHU
  Press, 1999. Selections. 

* Richard Kagan, *Lucrecia's Dreams: Politics and Prophecy in Sixteenth-Century
  Spain*. University of California Press, 1995.


## Spanish Case Paper (Oct. 13) 

This week we will discuss your papers.


## Colonial Contexts I (Oct. 20)  

How did colonial society make problematic the operating categories of the
Inquisition? What did limpieza de sangre, piety, and institutional authority
mean in the context of the Viceroyalties of the Americas? Where did the
Inquisition fit in the institutional organization of structures of sovereignty
and control under early modern empire?

Read:

* María Elena Martinez, *Genealogical Fictions: Limpieza de Sangre, Religion,
  and Gender in Colonial Mexico*. Stanford Univ. Press, 2008.

* J.L Phelan, “Authority and Flexibility in the Spanish Imperial Bureaucracy”
  *Administrative Science Quarterly*, 5.1 (Jun., 1960), pp. 47-65.


## Extirpation vs Inquisition (Oct. 27)

Early on, the Crown ruled to exclude indigenous communities from the
jurisdiction of the Inquisition. Of course, this did not mean that native
religious beliefs and practices were left unattended. How did extirpation of
native practices relate to the process, procedure, and ideology of the
inquisitor? 

Read:

* Kenneth Mills, *Idolatry and its Enemies: Colonial Andean Religion and
  Extirpation, 1640-1750*. Princeton Univ. Press, 1997.

* Patricia Lopes don, "Franciscans, Indian Sorcerers, and the Inquisition in
  New Spain, 1536-1543," *Journal of World History* 17.1 (March 2006): 27-48.


## Gender and Sexuality II (Nov. 3)  

As an extension of the Castilian Inquisition (as opposed to in Aragon and
Valencia), the Holy Office in the Americas did not have jurisdiction over
unnatural sex, unless it involved sacrilege. This week's readings put clerical
and lay sexuality into context with one another in Mexico and Cartagena.


Read:  

* Zeb Tortorici, *Sins Against Nature: Sex & Archives in Colonial New Spain*
  (Duke: 2018)

* Nicole von Germeten, "Archival Narratives of Clerical Sodomy and Suicide from
  Eighteenth-Century Cartagena"

* Nora Jaffary, "Sacred Defiance and Sexual Desecration"

## What if institutions aren't what they claim? (Nov. 10)  

Dependence on institutional sources runs the risk of accepting the
self-proclaimed legitimacy of those sources as normative. Martin Nesvig does
not do that.

Read:

* * Martin Nesvig, *Promiscuous Power: An Unorthodox History of New Spain*. Univ.
  of Texas Press, 2018.


## A Modern Institution?  (Nov. 17) 

In the end, what role did the Inquisition as an institution play in the
emergence of modernity? Are analogues in the current day of its methods and
truths indicative of a formative, or even modern institution? Or does the
context of the Inquisition's activity within the juridical and jurisdictional
specificities of early modern Spanish Empire restrict it's import?

Read:

* Irene Silverblatt, *Modern Inquisitions: Peru and the Colonial Origins of the
  Civilized World*. Duke Univ. Press, 2004.


## Mexican Case Paper (Nov. 24)

One last discussion, of your own work. And then...

**That's a wrap!!**







